new Img("./images/author-schema.svg");

Very happy to be here. This is a short presentation, and I’m very happy to have an exit plan. Normally I am super stressed to fit everything in, “oh my god there’s so much I want to say”. But now, never mind, you can get the book! So we’re going to be able to focus on just a little part of the topic. I hope to get you excited. Maybe there are already some questions that will pop up?

So the topic I want to explore with you today is a specific aspect of copyright that deals with its concept of how we make, and how that relates to the world of abstract ideas. Because within all these practical legal rules, you can find something of an idea of what it is like to make something. Copyright comes with its own poetics, I mean its own idea of how creativity works, how artists work and how originality works. And many of the frictions in the legal system come about when the idea that’s embedded in the law of how artists work doesn’t match up with the practice.

We are all artists for copyright by the way, as long as what we make resembles a creative expression, it doesn’t need to take place in a professional setting—if we take pictures on holiday or we write a small story about our lives that we put on a social network, these are all considered creative expressions that bare the imprint of our personality.

new Text("Artists create from abstract ideas");

According to copyright, the world of abstract ideas is the place from which creative people make. It’s where they take their inspiration. So what are abstract ideas? Well, for example “artists create from abstract ideas”. You can for example write a text that explains that artists create from abstract ideas and someone else could write a text with the same idea. Both texts would be considered two different expressions and both get their own protection. Someone else could go and stage an opera based on this idea, or a telenovela and it would be all good. But it’s from the perspective of writing that the metaphor works best. Copyright was first invented for writers. And it’s easy to see how two separate texts, especially academic texts, might treat the same idea. In visual arts it gets more complicated to say what is the idea: it could an idea in the platonic sense, like a geometric form (new Img("./images/square.svg", "a", 4),). Or a colour. 

new Img("./images/original-expression-island.svg");

From a copyright perspective, to make something is to take an abstract idea and imprint it with a personality, and we’re all supposed to have one—a personality. This is what creates the possibility of originality because we have the same abstracts ideas but we have our own distinct personality. In this reasoning, if we can say what we make is ours, it’s because it’s so tightly connected to our personality.  So because these works are the product of abstract ideas and our unique individuality, these expressions exist more or less by themselves, on their own island. Somebody else would write something or take a picture it would be maybe very different. But that’s not necessarily true because all our pictures and or our writings tend to resemble each other a bit but that’s the idea. So with copyright we suppose there is such a thing as abstract artistic ideas that pass through humans and then something happens and that’s the magic. And that’s also the part that is ideologically charged,

new Img("./images/author-schema.svg");

This conception of creativity the puts the individual at the center is particular to a time and place. It rises to prominence with 18th century German thinkers and forms the basis for the romantic conception of art. It’s where we get to our contemporary notion of what it means to be an author. Before that, both individual personality and originality wouldn’t have been considered all that important. What would be important, for example, is the extent to which the artist mastered their craft. And while a work could convey visions and ideas, they wouldn’t necessarily be constructed as coming from the artist—but rather the artist would be a messenger of divine truths.

You could say I was psychologically primed to become an author because of my last name, which translates as writer. But if you go back long enough in time, you will see the connotations of such immaterial labour are different. It’s quite possible that when my last name first appeared, most people did not know how to read or write and writer refers to the person in the community who did. So when they would write, it would be not as a way to leave an imprint of their personality, but rather to perform a specific labour useful to the community.

These distinctions matter because legally a big difference has come to exist between creative labour and other forms of labour, whether intellectual or physical. Imagine you work in a car factory, and your job there was to put the wheels on the car. Ten years later, you see somebody driving a car which you have put the wheels on. You could tell them: “hey, I am the person that put the wheel one on there, I have a kind of intimate link with your car, and I would like some money or some say in where you drive the car”. With creative labour it works this way. The idea is that the product of your labour is so intimately linked to your personality, that a new kind of ownership exists: intellectual property.

new Img("./images/schema-public-domain.svg");

Next to giving us a shared domain of abstract ideas, copyright comes with another safety valve. This comes through the idea that over time, the tight link between author and work starts to give way to other links, where the public starts to appropriate and own the work as well. That’s why copyright’s duration is limited, after which the work starts to become part of the public domain. The public domain is where everybody is free to copy, adapt and re-use the work as they see fit. Unfortunately, this takes a very long time—70 years after the death of the author. Imagine you make a work at thirty and you live to eighty, that means 120 years of copyright. In most cases, copyright lasts longer after death than during the live of the author. And it stays equally strong throughout. Personally, I feel like a strong copyright makes sense mostly around the time of publication of the work—not only does the economic value of a work peak at this point, it’s also the moment that you as an author can use copyright to actively shape the context in which the work is published. If there would be a way for copyright to gracefully fade into the public domain over time, instead of all at once a hundred years later, I would be all for it.

new Img("./images/vermeer.svg");

The public domain, by the way, is in no way an end station—rather it’s part of a cycle. For example, this drawing we made with Loraine Furter, is based on the painting by Vermeer. But we put a bit of our own creativity into it,  and new we will get a new copyright for a hundred years. It’s a shallow copyright, because if somebody made a similar image, we would never be able to prove that they copied us and not Vermeer. But a copyright still. We short-circuited this right by adding a Creative Commons license so you can already copy it now. 

new Img("./images/elsa.png");

A lot of artists have been very busy with questions around authenticity, originality, authorship. They’ve been trying to question the very categories upon which copyright is built. So it means that while anything that would qualify as creative gets copyright this does not mean anything an artist makes would get copyright.
Here is a 1917 work by Baroness Elsa von Freytag-Loringhoven. Freytag-Loringhoven is rumoured to be responsible for the urinal now commonly associated with Marcel Duchamp. This work is from the same year, it’s a piece of utilitarian piping from a New York apartment and it’s presented as a work of art. It’s called “God” and it introduces the concept of a ready-made. So it’s a work of art, but from a legal perspective, it’s not clear if there is enough of an imprint of a personality for it qualify to get copyright. In fact, since conceptual art is specifically about the abstract ideas that are out of copyright’s scope, it makes it possible to share the concepts. Whomever came up first with the idea ready-made is important from a historical perspective, but everyone can use the idea to designate utilitarian objects as art if you wish.

new Img("./images/rama-deckchair.png");
new Img("./images/rama-fellatio.png");

Now once a work is recognised as a creative expression it’s protected pretty heavily. I mean I love this image, it’s from Wikipedia and it’s someone who- because it- for older images I always look to use images that I can actually use, either because they are old enough or because someone contributed them under an open license. This is a Wikipedia contributor who contributes to the category of sexuality drawings and these got deleted from Wikipedia. They got deleted from Wikipedia because they are quite strict on Wikipedia when it comes to copyright. They put in their guidelines what is acceptable and not from a copyright perspective because it’s very dangerous for a big initiative like Wikipedia to be considered as not being respectful of intellectual 
property. This will quite quickly get the lobbyists going against them and they really are clever enough not to want that.  But why did they get kicked off Wikipedia? It’s because the people who saw these images suspected that they would have been copied from a photograph. Copyright doesn’t just deal with copying a thing wholesale—this link between this abstract idea turnrf into a concrete forum and its maker is so strong that the maker  is supposed to be able to control who makes drawings after a picture. So, if you make a picture, now, somebody else wants to make a drawing like this and finds your picture to make the drawing from they actually should ask your permission. It’s pretty interesting because here we also see something about copyright—it’s only enforced on a very very limited basis because if all the people who ever made pictures of which artists then made drawings after these pictures, if all these people were to start suing then suddenly it would be pretty tough on artists. It’s been less en vogue now but for a while figurative drawing and painting was really very fashionable again and then a lot of it drawn after existing sources.  Marlene Dumas, Gerhard Richter, the list goes on.

It’s actually really interesting with the new European legislation when there is this idea that web platforms should preemptively scan uploads. It’s in a way bad but it in a way it’s also good because you're going to see how strong this regulation really is. It's always a problem when there's a regulation that's strong but selectively enforced because that means that it makes all kinds of power imbalances possible because the people who are savvy with the legal system or that have the know how might be able to profit more from this than others.

new Img("./images/apartment.jpg");

So, that’s Loraine Furter in her apartment and here we run again into the limitations of this idea that artist’s create from abstract ideas. It might be true for some artists, but one category of creatives for which it’s definitely not is for photographers: whatever is in front of your lens can be really quite concrete. If we look at just this specific photo. There are two posters; we see bits of books; there's a sculpture here and Lauren is wearing jewelry and clothes. All of these things are copyrighted. Actually, the reason this somehow passes legally is because all these things were there in the apartment already. So, what happens is something called incidental inclusion. That means that there is some leeway to reuse copyrighted works if they happen to be there. But if this would be in a studio, where we would have picked and said ok we're going to put this chair here; you're going to wear these clothes and we're going to hang this poster on the wall, then the situation changes. 
If you have the most maximalist interpretation of copyright, like is customary in France then you can get into trouble for this. So in France, for example, some photographers faced litigation because their model wore a bracelet that they did not ask about, or shoes that did not ask about, or tablecloth that they did not ask about.

new Text("Parody?");
new Text("Quotation?");

There are some exceptions to copyright, such as parody. There are a lot of artists who think to use this but the thing with parody is that it has to be funny or it  has to at least to be an attempt at humor. And in the end a judge needs to decide. Some very famous artists have tried without much success to use this defense. Well known are the cases of Jeff Koons and Luke Tuymans who did appropriation art—so reusing an existing image—and then the judges were like yeah we don’t really think it’s funny. So in art parody is not really an option.
Then there is quotation which is potentially very useful, and it works very well for text because for there is a clear precedent and the case law has grown over time. So in a text, you can quote but then the quote should not be too long and the quote should be an addition to the existing text. For audiovisual quotations, the rules are a lot challenges. The rules are not clear and different from country to country. And a practice like sampling, which could very well be considered a form of aural quotation, is not permitted under EU copyright, as recently ruled by the EU court of justice. They overruled an interesting judgment from German high courts who had an interesting judgment on a sample of Kraftwerk where they said that sampling should be possible because the whole hip-hop culture is so much based around this practice. Sadly the latest round of copyright did little to clear up and standardise the rules on audio-visual quotations throughout Europe, it would have been a great opportunity.

Because I have sixteen buttons I have sixteen slides and so after I filled the sixteen slides I realised that I only showed some of the constraining parts of copyright and the idea, of course, is that also copyright can be a creative and economical tool that you can use in a more empowering sense. I wanted to give a shorter talk, and there’s the resource of a book to go along with it—but you should know it is really a tool you can wield.

new Img("./images/graphic-design.svg");

Many real life copyright situations don’t involve one author, but a network of authors. If you do the graphic design of a book, you will get the copyright over the design. But you will also have to deal with the copyrights of texts you maybe did not write, typefaces you did not design, photographs you did not take, copyrights of photographed objects and personality rights of photographed people. And you will also have to deal with the client, who themselves might want to end up with parts of the copyrights. Because copyright was decided with the idea of expressions on islands, it can get complex quickly. But it’s something you will be able to wrap your head around!

When the books was still in it’s first printing there was a small action that I’d do. I realised after finishing this book is that I was in a way reproducing very much the whole - so if copyright is really very based on eighteenth century ideas so there are a lot of philosophers like Kant and Schlegel who were very active in thinking up what is creativity? How does it work? And who came up with a very individual vision of how creation works. If you look at the end of the book then there is a colophon and then you really start to see all the people that are involved—so I wrote this book and Loraine Furter edited the book and then Eleanor Ivory Weber copy edited the book. By the way copy editors legally could very well be considered co-authors but that somehow never happens because they're not good enough in lobbying I think. In any case, I can only testify how super it is to have their input. Then there is Julian Cabay, who was the legal editor, so the person who comes in when you say “is” and they say “probably would” and in many more ways, it's very important. So what I’d do to finish this presentation is to get a marker and correct this first version of the book and add this nice Latin phrase to say that it’s et al and it's not just me. But since the second printing, that’s on each cover now! I think it's nice to open up to questions.

